#translationWork
# Introduction
# Content
## 1
```start-multi-column
ID: ID_4f51
Number of Columns: 2
Largest Column: standard
```

_Life changes fast.
Life changes in the instant.
You sit down to dinner and life as you know it ends.
The question of self-pity._

Those were the first words I wrote after it happened. The computer dating on the Microsoft Word file (“Notes on change.doc”) reads “May 20, 2004, 11:11 p.m.,” but that would have been a case of my opening the file and reflexively pressing save when I closed it. I had made no changes to that file in May. I had made no changes to that file since I wrote the words, in January 2004, a day or two or three after the fact.

For a long time I wrote nothing else.

_Life changes in the instant._
_The ordinary instant._

At some point, in the interest of remembering what seemed most striking about what had happened, I considered adding those words, “the ordinary instant.” I saw immediately that there would be no need to add the word “ordinary,” because there would be no forgetting it: the word never left my mind. It was in fact the ordinary nature of everything preceding the event that prevented me from truly believing it had happened, absorbing it, incorporating it, getting past it. I recognize now that there was nothing unusual in this: confronted with sudden disaster we all focus on how unremarkable the circumstances were in which the unthinkable occurred, the clear blue sky from which the plane fell, the routine errand that ended on the shoulder with the car in flames, the swings where the children were playing as usual when the rattlesnake struck from the ivy. “He was on his way home from work—happy, successful, healthy—and then, gone,” I read in the account of a psychiatric nurse whose husband was killed in a highway accident. In 1966 I happened to interview many people who had been living in Honolulu on the morning of December 7, 1941; without exception, these people began their accounts of Pearl Harbor by telling me what an “ordinary Sunday morning” it had been. “It was just an ordinary beautiful September day,” people still say when asked to describe the morning in New York when American Airlines 11 and United Airlines 175 got flown into the World Trade towers. Even the report of the 9/11 Commission opened on this insistently premonitory and yet still dumbstruck narrative note: “Tuesday, September 11, 2001, dawned temperate and nearly cloudless in the eastern United States.”

--- column-end ---

*人事苦多变
万般来何急
往来温存地
长恨余叹息*

这是我在那之后最先写下的话。电脑显示这份文档（《沧桑笔记》）的变更日期是2004年5月20号晚上11点11分，但这是因为我关闭文档时反射性地按下了保存键。在五月份我其实并没有做更改，事实上，自从写下上述文字（大概在那件事发生后的几天里），这个文档我就没再动过。

很长一段时间里，我写不出任何东西。

*生活一如既往*
*生活面目全非*





=== end-multi-column

